---
date: 2020-05-13T07:09:01Z
title: "AtariOS, AmigaOS, and NewtonOS: Why Good Operating Systems Fail"
published: true
has_feature_image: false
feature_image: ""
---

The more one looks at old, nonexistent operating systems, the more one understands exactly _why_ the popular operating systems we enjoy today are still in general use. Older operating systems share a large amount of similarities with current operating systems; the theory and patterns older operating systems incorporated are still in use in most modern-day operating systems. The programming languages used to create the system internals are again often the same. Even the high-level hardware architecture that many of these systems lived on (CPU, main memory, permanent memory) have stayed nearly constant. Yet despite all these similarities, many older operating systems are no longer used as much as they were in their heyday. These operating systems, once used by large swaths of the population, are now relegated to use by people running legacy systems for hobby or for profit. Three such operating systems, AtariOS, AmigaOS, and NewtonOS, exemplify all these characteristics. This paper will detail their fascinating history, their intricate internals, and why they failed to gain the continued mass adoption that most modern operating systems enjoy today.

---

In 1985, Atari released their Atari ST computer. The ST was designed to be a cheap, affordable computer that brought all the features of a more expensive alternative to the homes of the middle class. With a full-sized keyboard, a two-button mouse, and a high-resolution display, the ST was the machine to beat. That competitive design didn't stop at the exterior though; under the hood, the ST boasted a blazing-fast processor based on the Motorola 6800, a graphics chip, DMA support, fast support for floppy drives, and MIDI support, among other features \[^1\]. This hardware was designed to compete directly with the likes of Apple and IBM with their Macintosh and PC machines \[^2\]. Atari wanted to be known as a computer company instead of just a gaming company, so this device was their ticket to getting that recognition.

A competitive computer is useless without good software to go with it, so Atari needed an equally capable and competitive operating system; thus, AtariOS was born. AtariOS, officially called **AtariTOS** \[^1\], was the operating system designed for launch on the ST, but went on to be used in many other Atari computers, such as the Atari Falcon \[^3\]. Inspired by the mouse and window system created by Xerox and popularized by the Macintosh, TOS included a windowing system and a mouse. Instead of building the OS from scratch, Atari worked with the company Digital Research to build a GUI shell on top of CP/M, an OS created previously by Digital Research. The duo customized CP/M to fit Atari's needs and developed GEM (Graphical Environment Manager), the GUI shell that the user would interact with \[^4\]. Developers were able to write applications for the system in the accessible C language with plenty of exposed API surfaces \[^3\].

Under the hood, TOS was equally complex. Consisting of five main modules (Desktop, DOS manager, BDOS, BIOS, VDI, and AES) \[^1\], TOS is a beast to understand. Most models TOS ran on had a linear address space and could only have around 16MB worth of addresses. TOS also used a modified FAT file system for its disks, removing some features and protection methods \[^5\]. Details on the implementation of TOS other than these are sparse and nearly nonexistent.

TOS was hailed by critics as a success and constantly compared to the Macintosh operating system. however, sales of the Atari ST were not very high, peaking at 400 thousand in 1987 according to an Ars Technica article on the subject \[^6\]. Atari failed to push forward and continue innovating as it had before the computer space, so Apple eventually copied features that made the ST so successful and stole a significant portion of its market share. Because TOS was bound to the platform it was made for, TOS eventually faded into obscurity as the Atari company went down with it. Atari as a company ceased to exist when it merged with JTS in 1996, now being sold from company to company as it fails to embody even a sliver of its former reputation \[^7\].

---

The Commodore Amiga was one of the Atari ST's main competitors, and it surprisingly got its start through Atari. Jay Miner and Larry Kaplan, two ex-Atari employees, founded Hi-Toro, a company whose goal was to create a 16-bit gaming console. Similarly to the ST, this machine was to use the Motorola 68000 processor and have gorgeous graphics, with it being capable of displaying over 4096 colors. The machine was to also be bundled with a keyboard and a floppy drive, which made it _much_ easier for developers to write applications for. After a small legal dispute, Hi-Toro rebranded its company and console to Amiga and was acquired by Commodore a few years later. Commodore was known as a computer company, not as a gaming company like Atari was, so it turned the Amiga into a home computer, a successor to its Commodore 64, instead of a gaming console \[^8\].

While the Amiga hardware might have been a decent fit for a home computer, the operating system was not; Commodore, much like Atari, needed a better OS for its computer, and it needed it fast. After some searching, Commodore decided to take the same route Atari took and adapt existing software. it found TRIPOS from MetaComCo (which stands stands for TRivial Portable Operating System) and adapted it to fit its needs \[^8\]. Ease-of-development was a focus; according to the official AmigaOS documentation wiki, development was primarily done in the accessible C language \[^9\]. Development could also happen on-machine because the device had a keyboard, removing the need for an external environment \[^8\].

AmigaOS's internals were not nearly as
